				Project Log - Starbucks Menu Query
Project Start: 1/6/2022
Project End: --

Deliverables: Serise of tables of my most optimal (- calories, + caffine) orders
Learning Outcomes: Pratice ETL, Joins, short query scripts 

Experiential Learnigns: 
2/12/22 - 3:30 AM -- cleaning data w/sql, what happens when you work on unclean data, 
brute-force reformatting, Data types

Primary technology: SQL, Postgresql/pgAdmin 4

Source: Kaggle (https://www.kaggle.com/starbucks/starbucks-menu)


I. Set-up, Prep, Plan - 1/8/22 8:15 pm
I manually started a small database from csv files of nutritional data for 
starbucks menu items. It took me way too long to figure out what to do in part because
I forgot that my previous queries used existing db's. 

1/17/22 4:15 pm
I believe this querey requires a full join, essentially I need to combine all the 
relevant data from the drinks menu and food menu...It could be a left/right join based
on the fact that the food menu has a bunch of datapoints that I won't need...
The join would be based on calories, fat, protein, carbs and caffine from the drinks
and calories, fat, protein, carbs from the food. 

1/21/22 11:35 pm
I've run into an issue scripting the joins for my query. It occurs to me that I'm
attempting a join on a non-unique value (calories) because both tables had that
measure, but right now all of the relevant tables includ non-unique float values.
I need to create a unique integer id that I can center for the join.

1/23/22 9:55 am
After spinning my wheels in frustration, I've decided to start over creating another
set of tables on the database because I've so confused the structure and syntax.

2/5/22 11:05 am
I'm good on creating the db/tables, I was able to copy the data into the tables with a previous
script, but when I went to write the join, I realized I needed an "ID" value for a primary key.
For whatever reason, inserting this value eludes me so I'm (...)

2/7/22 4:30 pm
I'm not sure where the previous entry was going, but I eventually realized that 
it was easier to insert the required column using the interface, instead of trying
to write a new script. I have my primary key, but a question remains: am I going to
be able to run the queries I think I want because the tables don't share any items
but the more I think about it, the more I think that's a dumb question because 
that's the point and purpose of SQL. I'm not performing processees on the tables,
I'm pulling info from them based on pre-scripted conditions. 

With that issue settled, it's time to move on to the query and analysis

 
II. Analysis 5:45 pm




PART 1: CLEANING






Query Drafts -

1. Caffine Content:
SELECT beverage
FROM public.drinks
ORDER BY caffeine DESC
LIMIT 5 

This produces a less-than-helpful output:
"Iced Brewed Coffee (With Milk & Classic Syrup)"
"Tazo® Tea"
"Tazo® Tea"
"Tazo® Tea"
"Tazo® Tea"

I need to be more specific in this query.


Expanding the query produces an interesting result:
--------------------------------------------------------------
SELECT beverage, beverage_prep, caffeine
FROM public.drinks
ORDER BY caffeine DESC
LIMIT 50 


"Iced Brewed Coffee (With Milk & Classic Syrup)"	"2% Milk"	[null]
"Shaken Iced Tazo® Tea (With Classic Syrup)"	"Venti"	"Varies"
"Tazo® Tea"	"Grande"	"Varies"
"Shaken Iced Tazo® Tea Lemonade (With Classic Syrup)"	"Grande"	"Varies"
...
"Mocha"	"Grande Nonfat Milk"	"95"
"Tazo® Chai Tea Latte"	"Grande Nonfat Milk"	"95"
"Coffee"	"Venti Nonfat Milk"	"95"
"Coffee"	"Whole Milk"	"95"
"Coffee"	"Soymilk"	"95"
"Coffee"	"Grande Nonfat Milk"	"95"
...
"Tazo® Chai Tea Latte"	"Soymilk"	"95"
"Caramel"	"Grande Nonfat Milk"	"90"

--------------------------------------------------------------
The following query drafts are attempts to clarify what data I hope to collect from the 
db. If I had realized that my data was not clean, I would have had fewer issues, but this
is a learning experience, that's the whole point. 

SELECT beverage, beverage_prep, caffeine
FROM public.drinks
WHERE caffeine LIKE '%[0-9]%'

Question:This query returned no rows?
Answer: This query was backwards, it excluded everything?


SELECT beverage, beverage_prep, caffeine
FROM public.drinks
WHERE IsNumeric(caffeine) = 1


Answer: the caffeine column is varchar, not int or numeric

--------------------------------------------------------------
SELECT beverage, beverage_prep, caffeine
FROM public.drinks
WHERE caffeine NOT LIKE '%[^0-9]%' and caffeine != 'varies' and caffeine != 'Varies' and caffeine != ''
ORDER BY caffeine DESC

There seems to be some grouping happening? I'm not sure why the caffine seems to be
grouped (in descending order) by first digit:
95, 95, 94, 94, 90...300, 300, 30, 200, 200, 20...10...


SELECT beverage, beverage_prep, caffeine
FROM public.drinks
WHERE caffeine NOT LIKE '%[^0-9]%' 
and caffeine != 'varies' 
and caffeine != 'Varies' 
and caffeine != ''
and caffeine != '0'
ORDER BY caffeine DESC

Actually this works too:

SELECT beverage, beverage_prep, caffeine
FROM public.drinks
WHERE caffeine != 'varies' 
and caffeine != 'Varies' 
and caffeine != ''
and caffeine != '0'
ORDER BY caffeine DESC

The 'NOT LIKE...' was consice, but not inclusive; it didn't account for the "varies"

Looking at the 'beverage' category, it looks like there are a number of drinks that
need to be cleaned because (for some reason) the strings contain special characters
that did not translate into the appropriate formatt in the CSV. I also should have 
explored the data before I started analysis. If I had run this in VS Code, I could
probably clean/explore the data using python and then run the SQL query in the same
editor, I can do that the second time arround. I need to revisit this and the twitter
project again any way. 

It took way too long, but I finally got SQL to show me the beverage categories,
now I just need to determine what alterations need to be made.

Frappuccino (bev_cat), blended coffee (drink/beverage), Caramel (flavor) w/o whip
"Caramel frappuccino"; w/o whipped cream seems to be the default

I've been focused on the "beverage" column, I'll have to organize the same process
on the "beverage_category" column

COMPLICATION:
the beverage preparation Lists the "size milk" for the first iteration and then only
the milk option for the same size, before listing the "next size milk"through all 4
sizes. I might have to manually repeat the size for all milk options (non-fat, 2%,
soy...though I also happen to know they offer whole milk, and since this dataset
was generated they've expanded the plant-based offerings to include almond, coconut -
in some locations/seasons, and oat milk).
...I bet that's why the 'SORT BY caffeine DESC' created that wierd group effect...


HOLY SHIT...Thank you grow with google. The sorting problem is caused by the table I 
created. Because the nutritional values were different units (g, mg, %DV) I encoded them
all as VARCHAR, as such, SQL sorts them based on the first value as I observed. It doesn't
know to treat caffiene as a numerical value.

This is a valuable lesson on cleaning data sets, if I had evaluated each of the measures I
intend to use, I *might* have noticed that it could be an integer or float, thus avoiding
the blanket use of VARCHAR data type. 



2/14/22 1:30 PM

I decided to get over my need to understand how to automate this task, and just do it. 
I've opened the editor for the table and I'm manually changing the drink/category names.
I did myself a service by creating the ID before hand, because according to the documentation
db's are read only without the primary key. I still want to figure out out to automate
that process, but I think I can do that later, putting the accent over the "e" in caffe.

Okay, the data is now clean, at that level at least, I still need to change the data types for
caffeine and the percentages (calcium, iron, vitamins, etc.) but I can do that later. Also,
while creating this db, it seems I made calories and "id" a primary key. I think I can drop
'ID' because the table is numbered, but I'll have to check that before I start making changes.

Sidnote: it looks like pgadmin uses UPDATE/SET instead of REPLACE. It uses the 'ID' number to
identify what get's changed. I guess that makes sense because if the only identifyer is the
value that's being changed, I'd imagine that's a great way to loose track of a value.




2/15/22 3:30 PM

I actually think I need to keep the ID...I don't know what I was thinking, of course the table is
numbered, that isn't a fixed identifier. I do need to remove the PK status from calories. I get
what I was trying to do...but that was kinda dumb. 

Removed calories as a PK, leaving "ID" as the only one.
--Right cliked the table, properties, constraints, deleted the primary key data that was there
--and selected the column I wanted there.

Next up: changing the data type on caffiene.

	ERROR:  invalid input syntax for type numeric: "varies"

...this is how we got here.

In order to make the caffiene column numeric, I have to do something with the "varies" values.


--Cleaning

--1. Caffeine:
SELECT beverage, beverage_prep, caffeine
FROM public.drinks
WHERE caffeine = 'varies' 
 or caffeine = 'Varies' 
 or caffeine = ''
--there are 22 tea drinks (and 1 smoothie) with "varies" as
--it's caffiene value

UPDATE public.drinks
SET caffeine = 0
WHERE caffeine = 'varies' 
or caffeine = 'Varies' 
or caffeine = '' 

ALTER TABLE public.drinks
ALTER COLUMN caffeine TYPE numeric USING caffeine :: numeric;

Caffeine is now numeric and sorts in order. 






PART 2. QUERY - DRINKS


The queries are pretty straight forward, I might have to manually add the drink size.
The milk prep is grouped by size, or I could try to write logic based on the count,
the first calorie value is the short, second is tall, third grande, and fourth venti...


EURIKA!!













Notes:
#table refers to a local (visible to only the user who created it) temporary table.
##table refers to a global (visible to all users) temporary table.
@variableName refers to a variable which can hold values depending on its type.